ExperimentsWithFPGA/README.md, before:

## ExperimentsWithFPGA 
_______________

In this repo I'll post my private notes from reading the series of articles that appeared in the *Elektronika Praktyczna* magazine. <br/>
It was a series of eighteen [?] articles, the first article appeared in the issue 12.2019 <br/>
The articles were written in my mother language (Polish). You can buy all numbers directly from the producer: https://ulubionykiosk.pl/archiwum/elektronika-praktyczna [27.04.2021]. <br/>
On the internet you can find legally shared articles (perhaps not every article was shared). Just search in google "elektronika praktyczna eksperymenty z fpga", example of second article: https://ep.com.pl/kursy/13584-eksperymenty-z-fpga-2 <br/>

Below I will describe how to start the first project with Quartus and upload project to FPGA. This will be additional info, for my convenience, but maybe, it'll useful for someone in the future :) <br/>

### How run Quartus
I'm linux user (Debian buster 4.19), so everything will be shown on linux. I used **Quartus Prime Version 20.1.0 Build 711 06/05/2020 SJ Lite Edition**, *Patches Installed: None*. Unfortunately I will not show (maybe later) how to install Quartus with all drivers, but I remember that I had very very big problem with it :D <br/>
So in first step from terminal in **superuser mode** we're going to destination where we installed Quartus: <br/>
`/home/mozerpol/Documents/nauka/quartus/quartus/bin` <br/>
In *bin* folder we should find a file called "quartus", only quartus, not quartus_asm or quartus_sh. When we find this file we can run it: <br/>
`root@mozerpol-pc:/home/mozerpol/Documents/nauka/quartus/quartus/bin# ./quartus` and press *enter* <br/>

### First project in Quartus
I learned Verilog, so I will show on this. After running the program, we should see main window: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116442136-704fe180-a852-11eb-9879-5698bf49f210.png)

In the upper right corner click *File* -> *New Project Wizard...*. After whis we will see: 
1. <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116383619-4927ee80-a817-11eb-992a-ba1c37493f1a.png)
2. In the first form select directory for project in the second form write name for project <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116384518-35c95300-a818-11eb-9d90-e7bb362fb77e.png)
3. In the next step *Project Type* select option *Empty Project* and click *Next*.
4. In the next step we have *Add Files* window. We (or I ;p) don't want add files to projesc, so just click *Next*.
5. Step *Family, Device & Board Settings*. In this stage we must select matchable device. <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116385280-ef282880-a818-11eb-80c1-1c304f8ac655.png)
We are setting everything in tab *Device*. In part *Avalible devices* find your device and select it. How to know, which exactly FPGA is in your board? Just look at board and find FPGA. Below we have example photo from internet. <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116386942-935e9f00-a81a-11eb-8a82-d5cf2c628b0d.png) <br/> Thanks to numbers which are on FPGA, we know that it is *MAX 10* family, device *10M50DAF484C6GES*. <br/>
Select it (not exactly that, but your device that you have on your own board, it's example ;p) <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116388009-b2a9fc00-a81b-11eb-8d85-4bb95fb2ef0c.png)
6. In the next step *EDA Tool Settings* select everywhere *<None>*.
7. Last window in our configuration is *Summary*.
8. Now our main window looks like: <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116389086-db7ec100-a81c-11eb-907b-888077490e4f.png)
9. Now it's time to add verilog file. To do this, click *File* -> *New...*, after this you'll see something like this: <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116430487-2d3c4100-a847-11eb-9c78-c518dabbb872.png) <br/>
Click on *Verilog HDL File*
10. Now, you should see empty page, where we can write some code. Just copy and paste below code (will turn on some LEDs on my board): <br/>
```verilog
module quartusFirstTest(
    output a,
    output b,
    output c
);

assign a = 1'b0;
assign b = 1'b1;
assign c = 1'b1;

endmodule
```

11. Save project by *ctrl + s*. It's very important filename and name after word `module` in our code must be the same as project name. So, if our project is called *quartusFirstTest*, then verilog file must be called *quartusFirstTest.v* and module in our code. Of course not every file or module must be called in this way :D. Only one file and one module.
12. The next step: click on the icon *Start Compilation* or press *Ctrl + L*. Below is the picture, with icon which you should click: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116433590-f0257e00-a849-11eb-9dde-347f181e585e.png) <br/>
This start compilation. On the left side you should see bars with progress and bottom with messages like warnings or errors.
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116432967-58c02b00-a849-11eb-96d8-e426a4ea881b.png)
13. Now click on the *Pin Planner* or press *Ctrl + Shift + N*, Below is the picture, with icon which you should click: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116435464-aa69b500-a84b-11eb-9b28-3e78ae14c10f.png)
14. In next step we must assign output pins from FPGA to our variables (variables from the code). To do this select from *Location* part (table on the bottom) the correct pins: <br/>
![aaaaa](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116443770-56af9980-a854-11eb-9406-316232d1bdee.png) <br/>
Ok, but how to know which output pins assign to our variables? It's easy, from datasheet our board. I'm using T-Core dev board, inside you can find info which pin on our board was connected to LED: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116444162-bb6af400-a854-11eb-9e5a-d7431ac0c8db.png) 
Thanks to this picture we ca notice that LEDs were connected to pin: *PIN_AA14*, *PIN_AA15*, *PIN_AA16* and *PIN_AA17*. It's very important. In datasheet we have double *PIN_AA15*, but it's mistake, should be *PIN_AA17* instead *PIN_AA15*.
15. Now you must once again compile our project, so just repeat steps from point *12*.
16. Connect board to computer.
17. Double click on *Program Device*: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116445346-18b37500-a856-11eb-9fbf-3f65570d53e8.png)
18. On  the left side you have *Add File...*, click on it. After this navigate to *output_files* -> click on *projectName.sof*. Then click on *Open*: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116445688-71830d80-a856-11eb-9582-6cfa82747312.png)
19. Click on *Hardware Setup...* (left upper corner) -> from *Currently selected hardware* select your board: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116446227-05ed7000-a857-11eb-80f8-03fe0b59aa98.png)
20. Click *Start* (left upper corner), now the code will be upload to our board.
21. In right upper corner you have status bar. Green bar with word *100% (Successful)* means that our code is inside our board.
22. I'm happy, because it works for me ;p <br/>
![179973020_3516412151792112_8148573461671603551_n](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116446954-c410f980-a857-11eb-8158-da1b11b2eeda.jpg)

### About the FPGA chip usedIn my projects I used 
In the picture above you can see which FPGA I use. It's *Intel (earlier Altera) 10M50DAF484C7G*. [Here](#https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/programmable/us/en/pdfs/literature/hb/max-10/m10_overview.pdf) can find datasheet for MAX 10 family. <br/>
| ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116540518-8e692080-a8ea-11eb-852c-aa3f6f137b9f.png) |
|:--:|
|*Meaning characters on the cover*|
| source: *https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/programmable/us/en/pdfs/literature/hb/max-10/m10_overview.pdf*|

As above, my device *10M50DAF484C7G* has:
- 10M - family Intel MAX 10
- 50 - 50k logic elements
- DA - Dual supply - analog and flash features with RSU option (more about RSU below)
- F - Package type: FBGA
- 484 - package type, size and haw many pins: 484 pins 
- C - operating temperature: 0°C - 85°C
- 7 - Speed, average
- G - nothing important

### More details about MAX 10
Below I will explain some of the features from the datasheet that seem important. <br/>
Core has *4-input look-up table (LUT)*. What is it? 

opisac reszte tego datasheet ;/

Commit message:

Add about true dual-port

ExperimentsWithFPGA/README.md, after:

## ExperimentsWithFPGA 
_______________

In this repo I'll post my private notes from reading the series of articles that appeared in the *Elektronika Praktyczna* magazine. <br/>
It was a series of eighteen [?] articles, the first article appeared in the issue 12.2019 <br/>
The articles were written in my mother language (Polish). You can buy all numbers directly from the producer: https://ulubionykiosk.pl/archiwum/elektronika-praktyczna [27.04.2021]. <br/>
On the internet you can find legally shared articles (perhaps not every article was shared). Just search in google "elektronika praktyczna eksperymenty z fpga", example of second article: https://ep.com.pl/kursy/13584-eksperymenty-z-fpga-2 <br/>

Below I will describe how to start the first project with Quartus and upload project to FPGA. This will be additional info, for my convenience, but maybe, it'll useful for someone in the future :) <br/>

### How run Quartus
I'm linux user (Debian buster 4.19), so everything will be shown on linux. I used **Quartus Prime Version 20.1.0 Build 711 06/05/2020 SJ Lite Edition**, *Patches Installed: None*. Unfortunately I will not show (maybe later) how to install Quartus with all drivers, but I remember that I had very very big problem with it :D <br/>
So in first step from terminal in **superuser mode** we're going to destination where we installed Quartus: <br/>
`/home/mozerpol/Documents/nauka/quartus/quartus/bin` <br/>
In *bin* folder we should find a file called "quartus", only quartus, not quartus_asm or quartus_sh. When we find this file we can run it: <br/>
`root@mozerpol-pc:/home/mozerpol/Documents/nauka/quartus/quartus/bin# ./quartus` and press *enter* <br/>

### First project in Quartus
I learned Verilog, so I will show on this. After running the program, we should see main window: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116442136-704fe180-a852-11eb-9879-5698bf49f210.png)

In the upper right corner click *File* -> *New Project Wizard...*. After whis we will see: 
1. <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116383619-4927ee80-a817-11eb-992a-ba1c37493f1a.png)
2. In the first form select directory for project in the second form write name for project <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116384518-35c95300-a818-11eb-9d90-e7bb362fb77e.png)
3. In the next step *Project Type* select option *Empty Project* and click *Next*.
4. In the next step we have *Add Files* window. We (or I ;p) don't want add files to projesc, so just click *Next*.
5. Step *Family, Device & Board Settings*. In this stage we must select matchable device. <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116385280-ef282880-a818-11eb-80c1-1c304f8ac655.png)
We are setting everything in tab *Device*. In part *Avalible devices* find your device and select it. How to know, which exactly FPGA is in your board? Just look at board and find FPGA. Below we have example photo from internet. <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116386942-935e9f00-a81a-11eb-8a82-d5cf2c628b0d.png) <br/> Thanks to numbers which are on FPGA, we know that it is *MAX 10* family, device *10M50DAF484C6GES*. <br/>
Select it (not exactly that, but your device that you have on your own board, it's example ;p) <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116388009-b2a9fc00-a81b-11eb-8d85-4bb95fb2ef0c.png)
6. In the next step *EDA Tool Settings* select everywhere *<None>*.
7. Last window in our configuration is *Summary*.
8. Now our main window looks like: <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116389086-db7ec100-a81c-11eb-907b-888077490e4f.png)
9. Now it's time to add verilog file. To do this, click *File* -> *New...*, after this you'll see something like this: <br/> ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116430487-2d3c4100-a847-11eb-9c78-c518dabbb872.png) <br/>
Click on *Verilog HDL File*
10. Now, you should see empty page, where we can write some code. Just copy and paste below code (will turn on some LEDs on my board): <br/>
```verilog
module quartusFirstTest(
    output a,
    output b,
    output c
);

assign a = 1'b0;
assign b = 1'b1;
assign c = 1'b1;

endmodule
```

11. Save project by *ctrl + s*. It's very important filename and name after word `module` in our code must be the same as project name. So, if our project is called *quartusFirstTest*, then verilog file must be called *quartusFirstTest.v* and module in our code. Of course not every file or module must be called in this way :D. Only one file and one module.
12. The next step: click on the icon *Start Compilation* or press *Ctrl + L*. Below is the picture, with icon which you should click: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116433590-f0257e00-a849-11eb-9dde-347f181e585e.png) <br/>
This start compilation. On the left side you should see bars with progress and bottom with messages like warnings or errors.
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116432967-58c02b00-a849-11eb-96d8-e426a4ea881b.png)
13. Now click on the *Pin Planner* or press *Ctrl + Shift + N*, Below is the picture, with icon which you should click: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116435464-aa69b500-a84b-11eb-9b28-3e78ae14c10f.png)
14. In next step we must assign output pins from FPGA to our variables (variables from the code). To do this select from *Location* part (table on the bottom) the correct pins: <br/>
![aaaaa](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116443770-56af9980-a854-11eb-9406-316232d1bdee.png) <br/>
Ok, but how to know which output pins assign to our variables? It's easy, from datasheet our board. I'm using T-Core dev board, inside you can find info which pin on our board was connected to LED: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116444162-bb6af400-a854-11eb-9e5a-d7431ac0c8db.png) 
Thanks to this picture we ca notice that LEDs were connected to pin: *PIN_AA14*, *PIN_AA15*, *PIN_AA16* and *PIN_AA17*. It's very important. In datasheet we have double *PIN_AA15*, but it's mistake, should be *PIN_AA17* instead *PIN_AA15*.
15. Now you must once again compile our project, so just repeat steps from point *12*.
16. Connect board to computer.
17. Double click on *Program Device*: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116445346-18b37500-a856-11eb-9fbf-3f65570d53e8.png)
18. On  the left side you have *Add File...*, click on it. After this navigate to *output_files* -> click on *projectName.sof*. Then click on *Open*: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116445688-71830d80-a856-11eb-9582-6cfa82747312.png)
19. Click on *Hardware Setup...* (left upper corner) -> from *Currently selected hardware* select your board: <br/>
![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116446227-05ed7000-a857-11eb-80f8-03fe0b59aa98.png)
20. Click *Start* (left upper corner), now the code will be upload to our board.
21. In right upper corner you have status bar. Green bar with word *100% (Successful)* means that our code is inside our board.
22. I'm happy, because it works for me ;p <br/>
![179973020_3516412151792112_8148573461671603551_n](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116446954-c410f980-a857-11eb-8158-da1b11b2eeda.jpg)

### About the FPGA chip used in my projects
In the picture above you can see which FPGA I use. It's *Intel (earlier Altera) 10M50DAF484C7G*. [Here](#https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/programmable/us/en/pdfs/literature/hb/max-10/m10_overview.pdf) can find datasheet for MAX 10 family. <br/>
| ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/116540518-8e692080-a8ea-11eb-852c-aa3f6f137b9f.png) |
|:--:|
|*Meaning characters on the cover*|
| source: *https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/programmable/us/en/pdfs/literature/hb/max-10/m10_overview.pdf*|

As above, my device *10M50DAF484C7G* has:
- 10M - family Intel MAX 10
- 50 - 50k logic elements
- DA - Dual supply - analog and flash features with RSU option (more about RSU below)
- F - Package type: FBGA
- 484 - package type, size and haw many pins: 484 pins 
- C - operating temperature: 0°C - 85°C
- 7 - Speed, average
- G - nothing important

### More details about MAX 10
Below I will explain some of the features from the datasheet that seem important. <br/>

![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/117030700-2eb2b100-ad00-11eb-8bf8-8904363aa483.png)

**TSMC** - Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company - is a Taiwanese manufacturing and design company. It is one of Taiwan's largest companies.

![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/117031165-9cf77380-ad00-11eb-8e8b-7f47c2843ca7.png)

**LUT** was described [here](https://github.com/mozerpol/NotesFromLearning/tree/main/FPGAodPoczatkuDoKonca#lut). <br/>
**PLL** was described [here](https://github.com/mozerpol/NotesFromLearning/tree/main/FPGAodPoczatkuDoKonca#pll). <br/>
**LE** - was described [here](https://github.com/mozerpol/NotesFromLearning/tree/main/FPGAodPoczatkuDoKonca#logical-structure). <br/>
Bro remember, *LUT* is part of *LE*.

![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/117031589-04152800-ad01-11eb-826d-6ed1656b141c.png)

**M9K** - is a synchronous memory block. The *M9K* block is useful for storing processor code, implementing lookup schemes, and implementing large memory applications. Each block contains 9,216 programmable bits, including parity bits. You can configure the *M9K* block as true dual-port, dual-port, and single-port RAM, and ROM. More [here](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/programmable/quartushelp/17.0/reference/glossary/def_m9k.htm).

**True dual-port** - it's the ability of some circuit to read and write simultaneously. So for example, if we have a RAM cell to which we can simultaneously write and read some data, we can say that this cell is *true dual-port* capability. Or we can read simultaneously two different datas or write two different datas in the same time. <br/>
Typically, this feature is discussed in the context of memory. To understand this better, we need to say more about memories. <br/>
Memories classification: <br/>
| ![obraz](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43972902/117035618-d205c500-ad04-11eb-9eba-d451a9ba9526.png) |
|:--:|
|source: *http://dejazzer.com/ee478/lecture_notes/lec15_memories.pdf* [04.04.2021]|

The **difference between single port RAM and dual port RAM** is that single port RAM can be accessed at one address at one time, thus you can read/write only one memory cell during each clock cycle. Dual port RAM has ability to simultaneously read and write different memory cells at different addresses. Single port uses a 6 transistor basic RAM cell, while the dual port RAM cell uses 8 transistor cell for memory. <br/>
Sum up, a dual-port memory has two independent access ports to a common storage array. Some dual-port memories can use one port only for write, the other one only for read but better designs have no such restriction, they allow read or write on both ports.
